So, when we look at algorithms and weighted
graphs for shortest paths and for minimum
cost spanning trees, we had to use some data
structures in order to make the updates efficient.
So, at that time we assume that these data
structures were available and we went ahead
and did an analysis of these algorithms. Now,
let us go back and look at these data structures.
So, we begin with the Union Find Data Structure
which is used in Kruskal's algorithm for the
minimum cost spanning tree.
So, recall how Kruskal's algorithm works.
We arrange the edges in ascending order of
the cost and we process the edges in this
order. So, each edge we pick up, if it does
not create a cycle, we add it to the tree
and we observe that not creating a cycle is
as same as keeping track of the components
that we have so far, and checking that the
end points line different components. So,
the edge u v can be added if u and v currently
are not connected. They are not in the same
component. Now, as the result of adding the
edge, the two components do get connected.
So, we have to merge those two components.
So, the bottle neck in implementing Kruskal's
algorithm efficiently is to keep track of
this collection of components in order to
check which component a vertex belongs to,
and to merge two components whenever we add
an edge connecting them.
So, formally the problem that we have are
trying to solve is to maintain a partition
of a set and update this partition, right.
So, by partition we mean that we have a set
S and it is broken up into some disjoint subsets.
So, these subsets do not overlap, right and
every element belongs to one of these things.
So, there may be some which have more than
one element and each element is assigned to
exactly one partition, right and we call these
partitions also components. So, in Kruskal's
algorithm and other applications, very often
we start with a partition in which every element
is on, its own. So, we never have maybe two
elements in a partition.
So, we will call this setting up as data structures.
So, we will call it union find because the
two operations we actually support on this
data structure are called find. So, this is
a query operation. It says, given an element
s, right. Let me know which component it belongs
to currently. So, this is an update which
it does not update the data structure. It
just queries the data structure and tells
us in which of these partitions does s currently
lie, and then we have an update which allows
us to take two partitions, right. So, may
be we take these two partitions and say now
combine them into single partition. So, we
call this union, right. So, there is a union
operation which merges partitions together
and there is a find operation which has to
keep track of which partition a set belongs
to an element belongs to over time with partition.
It originally would have got merged with other
partitions because of these two operations
union and find. We call this a union find
data structure which supports these two operations
efficiently, and the initialization of this
union find is an operation which takes a set
and breaks up to it. It has n elements up
into n components each containing one element.
So, the first issue that we have to deal with
is about the names of the components. What
do we call these components? A simple solution
we will find is to just use the elements of
the set itself as names, right. So, it does
not really matter of what names we give. We
just need to be able to check periodically
whether s and t or u and v belong to the same
component. So, we just need to know whether
find of u is equal to find of v, right. So,
the exact choice of how we label find of u
and find of v does not matter. So, as long
as we can check whether two labels are the
same or different, but rather than manufacturer
set of labels out of them have, we will actually
choose the labels to be set elements themselves.
So, initially we said every element lies in
a single partition. So, supposing I have a
set consisting of s t u, then I would initially
have three partitions. One contains s, one
containing t, and one containing u.
Well, the question is what do we call this
partition? Well, we just call them the same
thing. We call this partition s, call this
the partition t and call this the partition
u. So, sometimes the names of the element
will refer to names of partitions. Sometimes
they will refer to names of the elements themselves.
Now, what happens when we merge? For example,
supposing we merge these two partitions, right.
Then, the label has to be the same. So, the
element does not change, but maybe we might
take the set, the label u and make it t. So,
now, both element u and element t belong to
the partition label t, right. So, we just
use as the set of labels, the names of the
elements themselves.
So, in particular if you are dealing with
graphs, the elements are the vertices typically
and we already had convention that we have
n vertices in our set and we call them 1 to
n. So, set of elements is 1 to n and so is
our set of components, right. So, what we
will do now is the easiest way to keep track
of this is to setup an array, right. So, we
have an array which we will call component
and what will this array say. Well, this will
say that for each of the vertices or nodes
1 to n which component it belongs to, right.
So, initially we said each component will
contain exactly one vertex. So, we can just
have a vertex n a vertex i and component i
for every i. In general, after some time,
these might change.
So, this might have gone to component 3 is
might have gone to component 7 and so on,
right. So, over time the component that a
node belongs to changes because of the union
operations, so then when we find you, just
return the current value of component you
find and for union all we have to do is, we
have to check and make all the components,
both components k and k prime have the same
label. So, rather than invent a new label,
we will choose either k or k prime. In this
case we choose k prime. So, what we will do
is, we will go through and wherever we see
a k, we will replace by a k prime. So, we
will systematically replace every entry of
the form k in this array to k prime. So, after
this all component values we choose to be
k are now k prime, all which were k prime
remain k prime. So, effectively the two components
have been merged. So, this is a very simple
implementation of union find. So, let us try
and understand why this is not a very good
implementation from a complexity point of
view.
So, clearly in order to make the initial things,
we have to scan the array once, and then we
just have to initialize component of I to
be the value I. So, this takes order n time.
So, this is find. Similarly, finding an element
is efficient. We just have to look up the
ith element in the array and remember that
in an array accessing any element takes constant
time. So, this is an efficient operation.
It takes constant time. On the other hand,
union is a problem because the way we have
described union, we have to go through every
node, check if its component is k and if its
component is k, if component of i is k, we
have to update it k prime, right. So, regardless
of what the components k and k prime currently
look like, we will have to scan all the elements
and update those which are k to k prime. So,
this will take order n time for just one union
operation which is independent of the size
of k and k prime as current partition sets.
So, if we do a sequence of m such operations,
then this will be order m times n, right and
if it is n such operations, it will be n square,
right. So, a sequence m operation, each of
them will take order n time and we would like
to improve on this. So, basically we want
to see if we can improve on the speed of the
union operation.
So, let us make a slightly more elaborate
representation. So, we keep this array component
as before which tells us for each vertex I
which component it belongs to, and the components
as before are initially labeled 1 to n. The
names are drawn from the same set. So, basically
1 to n has the vertices 1 to n or also names
are components, and initially the component
of i, the vertex. i is in component i. Now,
we have a separate array of list, right. So,
for each component, that we currently have,
we keep a list. So, initially the list says
that the component 1 consist of the vertex
1 component, 2 consist of the vertex 2 and
so on, but over a period of time we could
have situation whether the component 4 consist
of vertex 1, 2, 4 and 7, right. So, for each
component we have the list of vertices that
it belongs to and we will also separately
keep track of the size. So, we will say that
the size of this component is also 4 and the
size of this component is 1. So, we have two
auxiliary things. We keep for each component
k the list of its members explicitly and we
also keep the size of this list. So, we know
exactly how big each component is at any given
time initially, of course the size is 1.
So, when we need do make union find, we said
component I equal to I as before, then we
initialize that the members of the list I
are component I adjust the list containing
I itself in the size of each component is
1. Now, find is exactly the same as before.
We just have to look at component and return
the value. The component I points to. Unions
is also similar to before. So, what we need
do is, we need do set everything that is pointing
to k to point to k prime inside. So, every
entry in component which k should be, k prime,
but now we can do this by just looking at
members. So, we do not have to scan all the
elements 1 to n. We can look up every element
that appears in members of k and update its
value to k prime, right. So, this is one saving.
We no longer have to go through 1 to n. We
have only looked exactly at the member which
belongs to the set k. Then, of course we need
to update these new things.
So, members of k now become members of k primes.
So, we will merge these two lists. Now, remember
that these two lists are in sorted order.
We can assume that they are always kept in
ascending order of the names of the elements.
So, merging two sorted lists as we did in
merge sort, takes time proportional to the
length of the final list. So, this will be
a linear time thing in proportional to the
size of the components k and k prime. Finally,
now we have one new component which subsumes
earlier to. So, its size is exactly the sum
of the previous two of course. These are partitions.
No element was repeated. So, every element
that joins the partition is a new one. So,
size of k prime is exactly size of k plus
the old size of k prime.
So, why do we get some benefit from this?
So, the first thing as we said is updating
a component is now proportional to its size,
right. Up - updating component takes orders
size of k steps. It does not take order n
steps. We do not have to go through every
vertex 1 to n. We can explicitly look up those
elements mentioned in members of k and only
update those values, but size of k actually
places in much more important role. What we
can do now is we can determine whether to
re-label k as k prime or k prime as k. Remember
we have a choice when we merge k and k prime.
All the elements are going to become part
in the same component. So, the new component
will be either called k or it will be called
k prime.
So, which one we should choose? So, the strategy
that we are going to do is to keep the name
of the larger one. So, the size of k is smaller
than the size of k prime. That means, k prime
currently has more members in k. Then, we
will keep k prime as a name of the final set.
So, we will replace all ks as k prime and
symmetrically size of k is bigger than size
of k prime. We will replace all the k primes
as k, right. So, the smaller set changes its
name and the bigger set keeps its name.
So, this does not give us any benefit in the
worst case of an individual union operation.
Suppose we have size of k and size of k prime
roughly the size of half. So, if we are built-up
two components which are roughly half the
size of the overall set, then whether we merge
k or k prime into the other set, we have to
update about half the values. So, this is
an order n operation, right. So, earlier we
have said that without doing anything fancy,
we will scan all the vertices and worst case
in fact is every case of update will take
as order n time. Now, it says that there is
a worst case where we cannot avoid taking
order n time. So, n by 2 is order n. So, therefore
what have we gained? So, what we have gained
cannot be really accounted for terms of individual
merge operations. We have to look at the cumulative
effect of bunch of merges. So, we need to
do what is more careful accounting. Now, we
have to account for the operations. So, remember
we did some careful accounting when we did
things like you know when we used adjacency
list in breadth first search. We said across
all the loops, we will see each edge exactly
twice. Therefore, across all the loops we
take order m time. So, we need to do a similar
kind of careful accounting across, not one
merge, but all the merges that they take place.
So, the effect of merging the smaller set
into the bigger set is that if I look at an
individual element, the component if it changes,
its labeled, right. If the component is currently
k and it becomes k prime, then new set is
at least twice as big as the old set, right.
So, supposing I had set k and an element s
in it and I had another set k prime, then
I decide to merge these into two single set.
Now, by assumption if the new set continues
to be called k prime, then that means that
k was less than k prime or you could even
say less than equal to does not really matter.
So, since case smaller than k prime, what
it means is that if I look at k plus k which
will be double the size of the old set, this
will be less than or equal to k plus k prime
just by substituting. Therefore, this is the
size of the new set, right. K plus k prime
is the size of the new set I construct and
it is going to be at least twice the size
of the old size. Therefore, whenever the name
of the set labeling component of an element
changes, the new set it belongs to at least
double the size.
So, now let us look at some sequence of m
union operations starting from the initial
condition when I have all elements in separate
partitions. So, what can happen in each operation,
perhaps I combine two elements, right. Now,
if the next time if I combine these two, then
totally in two operations I only affect three
elements. So, in the worst case if I start
doing this separately, each time in one operation
I accept it affects two and in other operations
it affects two more and so on. So, after a
sequence of m operations at most 2 m elements
have had the status change from the initial
condition, when they have a pointing two or
component consisting only themselves. So,
that means, only 2 m elements have ever been
affected by my union operations. That means
as component cannot have got larger than 2m,
because in order to get into a component,
something must change. Only 2 m elements are
allowed to have any changes apply to them
at all, right.
So, the size of any component after m union
operation at most 2 m, but how does a size
grow? It goes 1, 2, 4 because it keeps doubling
up to m, right. So, after log m steps if I
double 1 log m times, I will get m. So, therefore,
a component s can be relabeled a fixed, sorry
a fixed element s can be relabeled at most
log m times. So, because we have this doubling
the number of times that is set can be an
element can move it to a new set. It is restricted
because each time it moves the size size of
its component doubles, and there is a limit
on the largest component it will belong.
So, therefore, if we look at some total of
m union operations, we know that 2 m. So,
order m elements have had the component updated
and each has been updated at most log m times,
right. Remember now that when we are updating
elements, we do not touch any element which
is not updated. It is not the old setup, where
we have to scan all the nodes 1 to n in order
to decide which one is not because we have
the list members. When we want to update the
component k, we exactly update only those
components. So, we only touch the components
we change. So, m elements changes log m times.
So, totally we have m log m steps of change,
right. So, if we do m union operations, we
take m. It is not that each one takes m log
m time directly, but the cumulative total
of m union operations is only m log m, right.
So, this we can average out in a way you say
that therefore, since where m operations in
the total is m log m, even though some small
some more big on an average, they take log
m operations. So, this is a different kind
of analysis. It is not quite the analysis
we did for. For example the adjacency list
in bfs, where we just added of everything
across whole thing. Here also we are adding,
but we are also kind of pointing backwards
and saying now there are totally so many operations
and the total time taken across all these
operations so much. We divide and we give
each share of the total cost. So, though it
is not the case that in every single operation
takes log m time, we can kind of believe that
this gives us a log m implementation of the
union operation. So, this kind of analysis
is called amortized complexity.
So, this is the term which actually comes
from accounting from financial things, where
you have certain cost which for example you
might have in order to run a business. You
might have to setup something, right. You
may setup an office, and then all that now
if you cannot say that my cost in give one
was a lot, because I have to do a lot of work
to setup the office. Therefore, day one with
expansive what you have to do is look at the
total life time of your operation and say
this course is divided across the entire things.
So, is it work, right that is called amortization,
where you kind of take some fixed cost of
a, fixed piece of equipment or asset or work
and divide it across the entire life span
when it is going to be used. So, in the same
way here we are kind of doing amortized analysis.
We are counting across all the m union operations
how much time we take, and then working out
that each one takes roughly log n time.
So, how do we use this union find data structure
and Kruskal's algorithm? Remember Kruskal's
algorithm we initially sort the edges. So,
we have e 1 to e m and ascending order of
cost. Now, we begin with trivial partitions.
So, we do make union find of our set of vertices.
So, each vertex j is label j. So, we have
exactly n partition. One containing each vertex
and now we need to add the current edge we
are looking at, provided it does not create
a cycle. This is the same as saying that send
point was being different components. This
is the same as saying that if I do find of
u and find of v for an edge u v, right, find
of u is not equal to find of v and if find
of u is not equal to find of v, then I need
to do a merge. So, I need the union of these
two components. I can get their component
names by using find u and find v. So, this
will be some k in general the uth component
containing u. This will be k prime th component
containing v and I do a union of course, and
I got in new component which contains both
u and v.
So, since the tree has only n minus 1 edges,
we will only add n minus 1 edges out of the
total set to find the spanning tree. So, therefore,
we have order n union operations to perform
over all and we know, therefore, for any m
operations we said into will take m log m.
So, for m operations we have an overall amortized
cost of n log n, right, so maintaining the
partitions and adding them in all that takes
m, n log n. Now, initially we have to sort
the edges. So, that takes m log m, but as
we discussed when we actually look at Kruskal
in detail, since m is at most n square, we
know that log m is 2 log n at most. So, at
the level of orders of magnitude log m and
log n at the same, so we can look at m log
n m as same as m log n. So, the total cost
now comes out to m log m, sorry m m log n
plus n log n. So, we get m plus n log n.
If you remember the complexity that we claimed
for Prim's algorithm and also, actually for
Dijkstra’s algorithms which are similar
to prim's in structure using heaps, we claim
that those were both of that type m plus n,
if we use the heap to do the minimum distance
calculation. So, therefore, Kruskal's algorithm
with the union find data structure essentially
has the same complexity as prim's algorithm
using heaps.
So, to summarize what we have seen is that
we can implement Union-Find using an array
to components and array of list to name the
vertices in each components, and another array
to keep track of the size of each component.
With this the initialization step of making
the union find data structure of disjoint
individual element partitions is order n find
takes constant time. Amortize complexity for
a sequence of m operations is m log n. So,
we can think of each union operation is taking
log m time for a sequence of search m operations
starting from the initial.